# Ratman client lib

This is the client library used to write applications for Ratman.
Currently only a [Rust](https://rust-lang.org) implementation exists.

You can find `ratman-client` on
[crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/ratman-client) and its documentation on
[docs.rs](https://docs.rs/ratman-client)!


## Workflow

There are three main steps to using the client-lib:

1. IPC initialisation
2. Address registration/ login
3. Message sending and receiving


### IPC initialisation

By default the IPC socket for Ratman is running on `localhost:9020`.
Many of the Irdest tools allow you to overwrite this socket address,
to allow for local testing with multiple routers.  We recommend that
your application expose this option to users for testing purposes as
well!


### Address registration

An address for Ratman is associated with a cryptographic key pair.
Currently we don't expose the private key from the router to
applications (which will probably change in the future!)

When your application is given an address you should store it in your
application state somewhere, along with the corresponding auth token.
These will be important the next time your application starts.  **For
added security you may want to encrypt this data with a user
password!**


### Message sending and receiving

Sending messages happens asynchronously, which means that the client
lib will not get feedback on if your message has actually been
dispatched across a network channel, let alone been received.

Messages can be sent as one of two types: **Standard** and **Flood**.

**Standard** messages have a fixed recipient address and will be
routed to the destination where they will leave the network and be
processed by the target application (or dropped).

**Flood** messages are sent to every device and address on the
network, to allow for network-wide announcements.  Under the hood the
address announcement protocol uses Flood messages.  To limit the
amount of relevant Flood messages an application has to deal with,
they are namespaced.  The namespace itself is also an Irdest address.

So for example a **standard** message sent to
`ECB4-30B9-4416-C403-716F-601F-FC56-9AD3-BD2E-3892-227A-84AD-E6FC-A1CE-0A92-03F6`
will be carried across the network until it reaches _this exact_
address.

A **flood** message sent to
`ECB4-30B9-4416-C403-716F-601F-FC56-9AD3-BD2E-3892-227A-84AD-E6FC-A1CE-0A92-03F6`
will be delivered to _all applications_ that are listening on this
namespace.
